---
layout: post
title: Maps
summary: We look at functions/maps from a more conceptual point of view.
image: /assets/social/maps.png
---

## Introduction

Let $X$ and $Y$ be sets. A <dfn>function</dfn> $f: X \to Y$ is a rule which assigns to each element of $x$ an element $f(x)$ of $Y$.

When $X$ and $Y$ are spaces, a <dfn>map</dfn> $f: X \to Y$ is a function from $X$ to $Y$ which "preserves the (geometric) structure of $X$".

Since I haven't said what "space" means, this is kind of meaningless. Once we encounter precise definitions of various types of spaces, they'll be accompanied by precise notions of "map". Still, I'm going to use the word "map" more than "function" because it's shorter and more evocative. Also, sets are one kind of space (with no additional structure), and in that case map does mean any function.

## Terminology

In the above definition:

- $X$ is called the _domain_ of $f$
- $Y$ is called the _codomain_ of $f$
- the **image** of $f$ is the set of all values taken by $f$,
  {% raw %}
  <div>
  \[ \im(f) \Defeq \{ f(x) \mid x \in Y \} \]
  </div>
  {% endraw %}
- if $x \in X$, we call the value $f(x)$ the _image of $x$ under $f$_. We also call $x$ a <dfn>preimage</dfn> of $y \in Y$ if $f(x) = y$.

The difference between codomain and range can be hard to appreciate at first. The domain and codomain are part of the "type" of $f$, wheras the image might be something difficult to determine.

<aside class="block example">
  <header>Example</header>
  Consider the function
  \begin{align*}
    f\colon & \R\to\R\\
    f(x) &= x^2
  \end{align*}
  The image of $2$ under $f$ is $f(2)=2^2=4$, so $2$ is a preimage of $4.$ Another preimage of $4$ is $-2.$ The image of $f$ is the set $\R_{\ge0}=[0,\infty)$ of non-negative real numbers.
</aside>

In terms of vibes, the notation $f: X \to Y$ is approximately equivalent to

```ts
f: (x: X) => Y;
```

A more accurate (though still imperfect) translation would be

```ts
f: Map<X, Y>;
```

This is because in math, two functions $f$ and $g$ are considered _equal_ if

- they have the same domain and codomain
- they map each input to the same output: $f(x) = g(x)$ for all $x \in X$

The second point is an important difference between functions in math and functions in programming (which are really _algorithms_). For mathematical functions, there's no such thing as a "function body" or "runtime".

<aside class="block warning">
  <header>Warning</header>
  Many precalculus/calculus classes ask questions like: "What is the domain of the function

\[ f(x) = \frac1{x-1}? \]

This question doesn't make sense: the domain of the function is <em>part of the data of the function</em>. What it's really asking is "what is the largest subspace of $\R$ on which this expression makes sense?" (The answer being $\R -\{1\}$, since we can't divide by $0$.)

</aside>

Some more terminology. A function is:

- <dfn>injective</dfn> if it never sends two different inputs to the same output. This can be phrased as
  \\[ x \ne y \implies f(x) \ne f(y) \\]
  or equivalently as
  \\[ f(x) = f(y) \implies x = y. \\]
  The first form is maybe easier to think about, but the second is easier to work with.
- <dfn>surjective</dfn> if every element of $Y$ is the image of some $x\in X$.
- <dfn>bijective</dfn> if it is both injective and surjective.

<aside class="block example">
  <header>Example</header>
  Let $\R_{\ge0} = [0, \infty)$ be the space of non-negative real numbers. Consider the functions:

  <ul>
    <li>
      <p>$f\colon \R\to\R,\quad f(x) = x^2$</p>
      <p>
      This is not injective since $f(2)=f(-2)=4$.</p>
      <p>It is not surjective since there is no $x$ such that $f(x)=-1$.
      </p>
    </li>
    <li>
      <p>$g\colon \R\to\R_{\ge0},\quad g(x) = x^2$</p>
      <p>This is surjective but not injective.</p>
    </li>
    <li>
      <p>$h\colon \R_{\ge0}\to\R,\quad h(x) = x^2$</p>
      <p>This is injective but not surjective.</p>
    </li>
    <li>
      <p>$k\colon \R_{\ge0}\to\R_{\ge0},\quad k(x) = x^2$</p>
      <p>This is bijective.</p>
    </li>
  </ul>
</aside>

## Exponential interpretation

When we introduced products of spaces, we saw that that concept was related to multiplication of numbers. Functions are also related to a numeric concept: exponentiation.

For example, say we have two balls which can be painted any of three colors, red, green, blue. We can represent the possibilities as functions from $\\{B_1, B_2\\}$ to $\\{\red r,\green g,\blue b\\}$, e.g.
\\[
\vcenter{\LARGE{\red\bullet}{\blue\bullet}}
\quad\text{corresponds to}\quad
f(B_1) = \red r, \quad f(B_2) = \blue b.
\\]
There are $9=3^2$ possibilities in total:

{% raw %}

<div>
\[
  \Big\{
    f\colon
    \{B_1,B_2\}
    \to
    \{\red r ,\green g, \blue b\}
  \Big\}
  =
  \LARGE
  \left\{\begin{matrix}
    \red\bullet\red\bullet & \green\bullet\red\bullet & \blue\bullet\red\bullet\\
    \red\bullet\green\bullet & \green\bullet\green\bullet & \blue\bullet\green\bullet\\
    \red\bullet\blue\bullet & \green\bullet\blue\bullet & \blue\bullet\blue\bullet
  \end{matrix}\right\}
\]
</div>
{% endraw %}

In general, if $X$ and $Y$ are finite sets with $\|X\|$ and $\|Y\|$ elements respectively, then the number of functions from $X$ to $Y$ is $\|Y\|^{\|X\|}$: there are $\|Y\|$ options where to send each $x \in X$, and we can choose those values independently of one another.

This suggests defining $Y^X$ as the set of functions from $X$ to $Y$, so that
{% raw %}

<div>
\[ |Y^X| = |Y|^{|X|}. \]
</div>
{% endraw %}
This is called the <dfn>function set</dfn> or <dfn>mapping space</dfn> from $X$ to $Y$. Although this can be hard to think about, it's very powerful to go from thinking about

- individual elements of $X$ and $Y$, to
- individual functions $f: X \to Y$, to
- considering _all_ functions $X \to Y$ as a single object.

Another notation for the mapping space (more common in CS than in math) is $X \to Y$, in which case the notation $f: X \to Y$ is literally a type declaration. In any case, the mapping space from $X$ to $Y$ is approximately equivalent to the type `(x: X) => Y` or `Map<X, Y>`.

I'll try to avoid using the concept of mapping space except when we have precise definitions of "space" and "map", since

- the precise definition of "map" will affect what the actual elements of $Y^X$ are. For example,
  {% raw %}
  <div>
  \begin{align*}
    f&\colon \R \to \R\\
    f(x) &= x+1
  \end{align*}
  </div>
  {% endraw %}
  is considered an _affine_ map but not a _linear_ map.
- depending on the precise meaning of "space", it may be easy, difficult, or impossible to turn the _set_ of maps $X \to Y$ into a "space".

## Maps and products

Let's see how this interacts with the other way we've seen of combining spaces, namely products.

### Repeated multiplication

When $x$ is a natural number ($0,1,2,...)$ and $y$ is any number, the exponential $y^x$ is defined as repreated multiplication:

{% raw %}

<div>
\[ y^x = \underbrace{yy\dotsm y}_{x\text{ times}} \]
</div>
{% endraw %}

Something similar is true for function spaces. Recall that three-dimensional space $\R^3$ can be understood as the threefold product of $\R$ with itself,

\\[ \R^3 = \R \times \R \times \R. \\]

We can also view $\R^3$ as the function space $\R^{\\{0,1,2\\}}$. In code, this is saying that the types

```ts
[number, number, number];
```

and

```ts
{
  0: number;
  1: number;
  2: number;
}
```

are "equivalent".

Depending on your application, you might prefer to have types like

```ts
{
  x: number;
  y: number;
  z: number;
}
```

or

```ts
{
  height: number;
  width: number;
}
```

These can be encoded as the mapping spaces $\R^{\\{\r x,\r y,\r z\\}}$ and $\R^{\\{\r{height},\r{width}\\}}$.

### Maps into a product

Let $X$, $Y$, and $Z$ be spaces. We can form the product $Y \times Z$, and then ask what maps $f\colon X \to Y \times Z$ look like.

By definition, $f$ needs to send each element $x$ of $X$ to an element of $Y \times Z$. An element of $Y \times Z$ is a pair $(y, z)$ with $y\in Y$ and $z\in Z$. So can define maps $g: X \to Y$ and $h: X \to Z$ as the first and second components of $f$:

\\[ f(x) = (g(x), h(x)) \\]

In other words, _a function from $X$ to $Y \times Z$ is equivalent to two separate functions $X \to Y$ and $X \to Z$_. In terms of mapping spaces, we can express this as

\\[ (Y \times Z)^X \qeq Y^X \times Z^X. \\]

(I'll say more about $\qeq$ in a future post.) This parallels the identity for numbers

\\[ (yz)^x = y^x z^x. \\]

Here's what this equivalence looks like in code:

```ts
/** Projection onto first factor */
const pr1 = <X, Y>([x, y]: [X, Y]): X => x;

/** Projection onto second factor */
const pr2 = <X, Y>([x, y]: [X, Y]): Y => y;

/** Convert a function into a product to a pair of functions **/
const split = <X, Y, Z>(f: (x: X) => [Y, Z]): [(x: X) => Y, (x: X) => Z] => [
  (x) => pr1(f(x)),
  (x) => pr2(f(x)),
];

/** Convert a pair of functions to a function into a product */
const combine =
  <X, Y, Z>(g: (x: X) => Y, h: (x: X) => Z): ((x: X) => [Y, Z]) =>
  (x) =>
    [g(x), h(x)];
```

## Maps out of a product

What about maps _out of_ a product? That is, for spaces $X$, $Y$, $Z$, let's think about what maps $X \times Y \to Z$ look like.

These correspond to "functions of two variables": for example, the function

\\[ f(x, y) = x^2 + y^2 \\]

is a map $\R^2 \to \R$.

There is another way of encoding a function of two variables: for a fixed value of $x$, we can get a function $f_x: Y \to Z$ by defining

\\[ f_x(y) = f(x, y) \\]

For instance, if $f(x, y) = x^2 + y^2$ as above, then $f_2(y) = 4+y^2$. This is saying that a function of two variables can also be expressed as a function from $X$ to _the set of functions from $Y$ to $Z$_. Symbolically, this is

\\[ Z^{X\times Y} \qeq (Z^Y)^X \\]

or

\\[ (X \times Y) \to Z \qeq X \to (Y \to Z) \\]

This "lifts" the numeric identity

\\[ z^{xy} = (z^y)^x. \\]

In programming, this equivalence is called "currying".

```ts
/** Convert a function of two variables into a function returning a function. */
const curry =
  <X, Y, Z>(f: ([x, y]: [X, Y]) => Z): ((x: X) => (y: Y) => Z) =>
  (x) =>
  (y) =>
    f([x, y]);

/** Convert a function returning a function to a function of two variables. */
const uncurry =
  <X, Y, Z>(f: (x: X) => (y: Y) => Z): (([x, y]: [X, Y]) => Z) =>
  ([x, y]) =>
    f(x)(y);
```

## Coproducts

There's one more exponential identity remaining,

\\[ z^{x + y} = z^x z^y \\]

To get an analogue of this for mapping spaces, we need the concept of the _coproduct_ $X \amalg Y$. I don't want to really get into this concept right now, but it corresponds to the union type `X | Y`. The relevant identity is

{% raw %}

<div>
\[ Z^{X\amalg Y} \qeq Z^X \times Z^Y \]
</div>
{% endraw %}

Or if you prefer, this is saying that the types `Map<X | Y, Z>` and `[Map<X, Z>, Map<Y, Z>]` are "equivalent".

<aside class="block exercise">
  <header>Exercise</header>
  Convince yourself of the above, and implement the conversion in code.
</aside>

<nav class="blog-nav">
  <a class="prev" href="/2023/05/09/plotting.html">
    <span class="hint">Previous</span>
    <span class="title">&laquo; Plotting</span>
  </a>
</nav>