---
layout: post
title: Products
summary: We learn how to "multiply" two spaces to get a bigger space.
image: /assets/social/gng-products.png
---
In the [last post](/2023/02/21/spaces.html) we encountered the notion of _spaces_, which are a way of thinking about situations numerically and geometrically. We saw a few examples of spaces:

- $\R^n$ is the set of all $n$-tuples of real numbers, which we think of as $n$-dimensional space

- $[a, b]$ is the interval of numbers between $a$ and $b$ (inclusive on both sides).

- in particular, $\I\Defeq[0,1]$ consists of all $x$ with $0\le x\le 1$

- $S^1$ is the unit circle in $\R^2$

In this post, we'll discuss a way to combine two (or more) spaces $X$ and $Y$ into a new space $X\times Y$, called the <dfn>product</dfn> of $X$ and $Y$. There are two reasons to do this:

- it gives us more interesting examples of spaces;

- conversely, we understand complicated spaces by expressing them in terms of simpler "building block" spaces. Most questions about $X\times Y$ can be answered by answering the same question for the spaces $X$ and $Y$, and combining the answers somehow.

<div class="block definition">
  <header>Definition.</header>
  Let $X$ and $Y$ be spaces. The <dfn>product</dfn> $X\times Y$ consists of all pairs of elements from $X$ and $Y$:
  \[ X \times Y \Defeq \{(x,y) \mid x\in X,\, y\in Y \}. \]
</div>
The space $X\times Y$ is analogous to the tuple type `[X, Y]`.

### Examples

- Suppose a user's screen is $w$ pixels wide by $h$ pixels tall. The screen can be modelled by the space $[0, w]\times[0,h]$. The usual convention is that $(0,0)$ corresponds to the top left corner, but this is arbitrary. The order of the coordinates is also arbitrary: $[0,h]\times[0,w]$ would work just as well.

- The set of playing cards can be viewed as \\[\\{\spadesuit,\heartsuit,\clubsuit,\diamondsuit\\}\times\\{\mathrm A,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,\mathrm J,\mathrm Q,\mathrm K\\}\\]

- $\R^2=\R\times\R,\ \R^3=\R\times\R\times\R$, and so on. (See below about products of more than two spaces.)

- a cube is $I\times I\times I$; $I\times S^1$ is a (hollow) cylinder; $S^1\times S^1$ is a (hollow) torus:

<iframe src="https://codesandbox.io/embed/product-examples-fzi6pp?fontsize=14&hidenavigation=1&theme=dark&view=preview"
     allow="fullscreen"
     height="600"
     sandbox="allow-forms allow-modals allow-popups allow-presentation allow-same-origin allow-scripts"
   ></iframe>

- the $n$-dimensional unit cube is
  \\[ I^n = \underbrace{I\times\dotsb\times I}_{n\text{ times}} \\]
  This is harder to visualize in the same way as the cube above. But we can visualize it as $n$ slider controls.

## Multiplication

Let's explain why this operation is called multiplication. If $X$ is a finite set, we write $\|X\|$ for the number of elements of $X$, also called the <dfn>cardinality</dfn> or <dfn>size</dfn> of $X.$ For example, $\|\\{a,b,c\\}\|=3.$

When $X$ and $Y$ are finite sets, the size of $X\times Y$ is the product of the sizes of $X$ and $Y:$

\\[ \|X\times Y\| = \|X\|\|Y\|. \\]

For instance, say we have three possible colors and four shapes. The number of possible colored shapes is $3\times4=12:$

  {% raw %}
<div>
\[
\{{\red{red}},{\green{green}},{\blue{blue}}\}
\times
\{\blacktriangle,\blacksquare,\bigstar,\bullet\}
=
\left\{\begin{matrix}
\red\blacktriangle&\red\blacksquare&\red\bigstar&\red\bullet\\
\green\blacktriangle&\green\blacksquare&\green\bigstar&\green\bullet\\
\blue\blacktriangle&\blue\blacksquare&\blue\bigstar&\blue\bullet
\end{matrix}\right\}
\]
</div>
{% endraw %}

## Associativity

One of the most important properties of ordinary multiplication (of numbers) is _associativity_: this is the property
\\[ (ab)c = a(bc). \\]
which means that the expression $abc$ is unambiguous. For example, we could evaluate $2\cdot3\cdot4$ as
<div>
\begin{align*}
  (2\cdot3)\cdot4 &= 6\cdot4 = 24\\
  2\cdot(3\cdot4) &= 2\cdot12 = 24
\end{align*}
</div>
and both give the same result.

Something similar is true for the product of spaces, but we have to be more careful. We can give a direct definition of $X\times Y\times Z$ a space of 3-tuples
\\[ X\times Y\times Z \Defeq \\{(x,y,z) \mid x\in X,\, y\in Y,\, z\in Z\\}, \\]
or we can build it out of products of two spaces at a time:
<div>
\begin{align*}
  (X\times Y)\times Z &= \{((x, y), z) \mid x\in X,\, y\in Y,\, z\in Z\}\\[.5em]
  X\times (Y\times Z) &= \{(x, (y, z)) \mid x\in X,\, y\in Y,\, z\in Z\}
\end{align*}
</div>

These three options aren't "literally" equal. As an analogy, in TypeScript, `[X, Y, Z]`, `[[X, Y], Z]`, and `[X, [Y, Z]]` are all different types. But there is an obvious way to go between them:
\\[ (x,y,z) \longleftrightarrow ((x,y),z) \longleftrightarrow (x,(y,z)). \\]
In math, we generally leave these conversions implicit, so we will write
\\[ (X\times Y)\times Z = X\times Y\times Z = X\times(Y\times Z). \\]

I'll say a bit more about this expanded view of equality a few posts from now.

In my area of math, there's often a lot of work that needs to be done to keep track of all these implicit conversions. One of the difficulties is that when converting between $(X\times X)\times X$ and $X\times(X\times X)$, you don't want to accidentally use the "wrong" conversion
\\[ ((x,y),z) \longleftrightarrow (z,(y,x)) \\]
(which wouldn't typecheck for $(X\times Y)\times Z$ versus $X\times(Y\times Z)$)

<nav class="blog-nav">
  <a class="prev" href="/2023/02/21/spaces.html">
    <span class="hint">Previous</span>
    <span class="title">&laquo; Spaces</span>
  </a>

  <a class="next" href="/2023/05/09/plotting.html">
    <span class="hint">Next</span>
    <span class="title">Plotting &raquo;</span>
  </a>
</nav>